LOUISIANA BY REPRESENTATIVES WILLMOTT, AMEDEE, ANDERS, BAGLEY, BERTHELOT, BILLIOT, BROADWATER, TERRY BROWN, CARMODY, CONNICK, COUSSAN, COX, CROMER, DANAHAY, DAVIS, DEVILLIER, DWIGHT, EDMONDS, EMERSON, FALCONER, FOIL, GAROFALO, GISCLAIR, JIMMY HARRIS, HILL, HODGES, HOFFMANN, HORTON, HOWARD, IVEY, JACKSON, JEFFERSON, MIKE JOHNSON, ROBERT JOHNSON, NANCY LANDRY, LEBAS, LYONS, MAGEE, MCFARLAND, MIGUEZ, DUSTIN MILLER, GREGORY MILLER, JAY MORRIS, POPE, PUGH, PYLANT, REYNOLDS, SCHEXNAYDER, SCHRODER, SIMON, STOKES, WHITE, AND ZERINGUE AND SENATOR BARROW AN ACT To enact Part VI of Subchapter B of Chapter 5-D of Title 40 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, to be comprised of R.S. 40:1191.1 through 1191.4, relative to fetal remains; to provide for definitions; to require notification of parents' right to determine the final disposition; to require notification of available counseling; to provide for final disposition if no parental decision indicated after forty-eight hours; to provide for a notice of parental right form; to establish a limitation of liability; to provide for an effective date; and to provide for related matters. Be it enacted by the Legislature of Louisiana: Section 1. Part VI of Subchapter B of Chapter 5-D of Title 40 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, comprised of R.S. 40:1191.1 through 1191.4, is hereby enacted to read as follows: PART VI. DISPOSITION OF FETAL REMAINS §1191.1. Definitions As used in this Part, the following terms have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section unless the context requires otherwise: (1) "Final disposition" means the burial, cremation, or other disposition of the remains of a human fetus following fetal death. CODING: Words in struck through type are deletions from existing law; words underscored are additions. HOUSE BILL NO. 618 ENROLLED 2016 Regular Session ACT No. 59 HB NO. 618 ENROLLED (2) "Health facility" means a facility licensed by the Department of Health and Hospitals to provide health services. (3) "Miscarried child" means the fetal remains resulting from a spontaneous fetal death that does not require compulsory registration pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 40:47.§1191.2. Final disposition of fetal remains; rights of parents; notice required; exception A. Prior to the final disposition of a miscarried child, but not more than twenty-four hours after the miscarriage occurs in a health facility, the facility shall notify the patient, or if the patient is incapacitated, the spouse of the patient, both orally and in writing, of both of the following: (1) The parent's right to arrange for the final disposition of the child through the use of the notice of parental rights form as provided for in R.S. 40:1191.3. (2) The availability of a chaplain or other counseling services concerning the death of the child, if such services are provided by the health facility. B.(1) The patient shall have forty-eight hours from receipt of the notice of parental rights form provided by the health facility pursuant to Subsection A of this Section to indicate on the notice of parental rights form the patient's intent to arrange for the final disposition of the miscarried child and to return the notice of parental rights form to the health facility. (2) If the health facility receives the patient's completed notice of parental rights form within the time period required by this Subsection, and once it is medically appropriate for the final disposition of the fetal remains to occur, the health facility shall make the remains available to transfer for a minimum of seventy-two hours. After the transfer, the final disposition of the fetal remains by the transferee shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 10 of Title 8 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950. (3) If the health facility does not receive the patient's completed notice of parental rights form within the time period required by this Subsection, the fetal HB NO. 618 ENROLLED remains shall be disposed of in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of Health and Hospitals. C. No notice shall be required if both the patient and the patient's spouse are incapacitated or otherwise unable to receive the notice required by Subsection A of this Section. §1191.3. Notice of parental rights form The Department of Health and Hospitals shall promulgate, in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act, a notice of parental rights form to be used by health facilities to comply with the provisions of this Part. The form shall include, at a minimum, all of the following: (1) A definitive statement that reads as follows: "This notice of parental rights form is required to be provided to you pursuant to Louisiana law." (2) A brief description of the provisions of this Part along with concise instructions for the patient to follow regarding how to properly complete the form and return it to the health facility in the event the patient desires to arrange for the final disposition of the miscarried child. (3) A concise statement of the timelines that must be satisfied in order for the patient to arrange for the final disposition of the miscarried child. (4) A listing of state, regional, or national grief counseling organizations that may provide counseling services concerning the death of a child. §1191.4. Limitation of liability The provisions of this Part shall not be construed to create a cause of action, nor shall the health facility, or any person authorized to act on behalf of the health facility, be held civilly liable for any damages when a health facility makes a final disposition of the fetal remains in accordance with the provisions of this Part. Section 2. The Department of Health and Hospitals shall promulgate the notice of parental rights form pursuant to R.S. 40:1191.3 as enacted by this Act prior to January 1, 2017. Section 3(A). Except as provided in Section (3)(B) of this Act, this Act shall become effective upon signature by the governor or, if not signed by the governor, upon expiration CODING: Words in struck through type are deletions from existing law; words underscored are additions. HB NO. 618 ENROLLED 1 of the time for bills to become law without signature by the governor, as provided by Article 2  III, Section 18 of the Constitution of Louisiana. If vetoed by the governor and subsequently 3 approved by the legislature, this Act shall become effective on the day following such 4  approval. 5  (B). R.S. 40:1191.2 as enacted by this Act shall be effective January 1, 2017. APPROVED: SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE GOVERNOR OF THE STATE OF LOUISIANA MISSOURI 5588H.01I SECOND REGULAR SESSION HOUSE BILL NO. 2070 98TH GENERAL ASSEMBLY INTRODUCED BY REPRESENTATIVE FRANKLIN. D. ADAM CRUMBLISS, Chief Clerk AN ACT To repeal section 194.375, RSMo, and to enact in lieu thereof one new section relating to the disposition of fetal remains. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the state of Missouri, as follows: Section A. Section 194.375, RSMo, is repealed and one new section enacted in lieu 2 thereof, to be known as section 194.375, to read as follows: 194.375. 1. Sections 194.375 to 194.390 shall be known and may be cited as the 2 "Disposition of Fetal Remains Act". 3  2. As used in sections 194.375 to 194.390, the following terms mean: 4  (1) "Final disposition", the burial, cremation, or other disposition of the remains of a 5  human fetus following a spontaneous fetal demise occurring after a gestation period of less than 6  twenty completed weeks; 7 (2) "Remains of a human fetus", the [fetal] remains [or fetal products of conception of 8  a mother after a miscarriage, regardless of the gestational age or whether the remains have been 9  obtained by spontaneous or accidental means] of the dead offspring of a human being that has 10  reached a stage of development so that there are cartilaginous structures or fetal or skeletal 11  parts after an abortion or miscarriage, whether the remains have been obtained by 12  induced, spontaneous, or accidental means. EXPLANATION — Matter enclosed in bold-faced brackets [thus] in the above bill is not enacted and is intended to be omitted from the law. Matter in bold-face type in the above bill is proposed language. OHIO As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee 131st General Assembly Regular Session Sub. H. B. No. 417 2015-2016 Representatives McColley, Koehler Cosponsors: Representatives Antani, Becker, Burkley, Conditt, Retherford, Terhar, Vitale, Young, Patmon, Brinkman, Sprague A BILL To amend sections 2317.56, 3701.341, and 3705.17 and to enact sections 3701.3412, 3728.01, 3728.02, 3728.03, 3728.04, 3728.05, 3728.06, 3728.09, 3728.10, 3728.11, 3728.12, 3728.13, 3728.14, 3728.18, 3728.95, and 3728.99 of the Revised Code regarding the humane disposition of fetal remains. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF OHIO: Section 1. That sections 2317.56, 3701.341, and 3705.17 be amended and sections 3701.3412, 3728.01, 3728.02, 3728.03, 3728.04, 3728.05, 3728.06, 3728.09, 3728.10, 3728.11, 3728.12, 3728.13, 3728.14, 3728.18, 3728.95, and 3728.99 of the Revised Code be enacted to read as follows: Sec. 2317.56. (A) As used in this section: (1) "Medical emergency" has the same meaning as in section 2919.16 of the Revised Code. (2) "Medical necessity" means a medical condition of a pregnant woman that, in the reasonable judgment of the physician As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee who is attending the woman, so complicates the pregnancy that it necessitates the immediate performance or inducement of an abortion. (3) "Probable gestational age of the embryo or fetus" means the gestational age that, in the judgment of a physician, is, with reasonable probability, the gestational age of the embryo or fetus at the time that the physician informs a pregnant woman pursuant to division (B)(1)(b) of this section. (B) Except when there is a medical emergency or medical necessity, an abortion shall be performed or induced only if all of the following conditions are satisfied: (1) At least twenty-four hours prior to the performance or inducement of the abortion, a physician meets with the pregnant woman in person in an individual, private setting and gives her an adequate opportunity to ask questions about the abortion that will be performed or induced. At this meeting, the physician shall inform the pregnant woman, verbally or, if she is hearing impaired, by other means of communication, of all of the following: (a) The nature and purpose of the particular abortion procedure to be used and the medical risks associated with that procedure; (b) The probable gestational age of the embryo or fetus; (c) The medical risks associated with the pregnant woman carrying the pregnancy to term. The meeting need not occur at the facility where the abortion is to be performed or induced, and the physician involved in the meeting need not be affiliated with that facility or with the physician who is scheduled to perform or As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee induce the abortion. (2) At least twenty-four hours prior to the performance or inducement of the abortion, the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion or the physician's agent does each of the following in person, by telephone, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by regular mail evidenced by a certificate of mailing: (a) Inform the pregnant woman of the name of the physician who is scheduled to perform or induce the abortion; (b) Give the pregnant woman copies of the published materials described in division (C) of this section; (c) Inform the pregnant woman that the materials given pursuant to division (B)(2)(b) of this section are published by the state and that they describe the embryo or fetus and list agencies that offer alternatives to abortion. The pregnant woman may choose to examine or not to examine the materials. A physician or an agent of a physician may choose to be disassociated from the materials and may choose to comment or not comment on the materials. (3) If it has been determined that the unborn human individual the pregnant woman is carrying has a detectable heartbeat, the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion shall comply with the informed consent requirements in section 2919.192 of the Revised Code in addition to complying with the informed consent requirements in divisions (B)(1), (2), (4), and (5) of this section. (4) Prior to the performance or inducement of the abortion, the pregnant woman signs a form consenting to the abortion and certifies both all of the following on that form: As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee (a) She has received the information and materials described in divisions (B)(1) and (2) of this section, and her questions about the abortion that will be performed or induced have been answered in a satisfactory manner. (b) She consents to the particular abortion voluntarily, knowingly, intelligently, and without coercion by any person, and she is not under the influence of any drug of abuse or alcohol. (c) If she desires to exercise her rights under section 3728.04 of the Revised Code, that the applicable requirements under section 3728.05 of the Revised Code have been m et . The form shall contain the name and contact information of the physician who provided to the pregnant woman the information described in division (B)(1) of this section. (5) Prior to the performance or inducement of the abortion, the physician who is scheduled to perform or induce the abortion or the physician's agent receives a copy of the pregnant woman's signed form on which she consents to the abortion and that includes the certification required by division (B)(4) of this section. (C) The department of health shall publish in English and in Spanish, in a typeface large enough to be clearly legible, and in an easily comprehensible format, the following materials on the department's web site: (1) Materials that inform the pregnant woman about family planning information, of publicly funded agencies that are available to assist in family planning, and of public and private agencies and services that are available to assist her through the pregnancy, upon childbirth, and while the child is As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee dependent, including, but not limited to, adoption agencies. The materials shall be geographically indexed; include a comprehensive list of the available agencies, a description of the services offered by the agencies, and the telephone numbers and addresses of the agencies; and inform the pregnant woman about available medical assistance benefits for prenatal care, childbirth, and neonatal care and about the support obligations of the father of a child who is born alive. The department shall ensure that the materials described in division (C)(1) of this section are comprehensive and do not directly or indirectly promote, exclude, or discourage the use of any agency or service described in this division. (2) Materials that inform the pregnant woman of the probable anatomical and physiological characteristics of the zygote, blastocyte, embryo, or fetus at two-week gestational increments for the first sixteen weeks of pregnancy and at four- week gestational increments from the seventeenth week of pregnancy to full term, including any relevant information regarding the time at which the fetus possibly would be viable. The department shall cause these materials to be published only after it consults with the Ohio state medical association and the Ohio section of the American college of obstetricians and gynecologists relative to the probable anatomical and physiological characteristics of a zygote, blastocyte, embryo, or fetus at the various gestational increments. The materials shall use language that is understandable by the average person who is not medically trained, shall be objective and nonjudgmental, and shall include only accurate scientific information about the zygote, blastocyte, embryo, or fetus at the various gestational increments. If the materials use a pictorial, photographic, or other depiction to provide As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee information regarding the zygote, blastocyte, embryo, or fetus, the materials shall include, in a conspicuous manner, a scale or other explanation that is understandable by the average person and that can be used to determine the actual size of the zygote, blastocyte, embryo, or fetus at a particular gestational increment as contrasted with the depicted size of the zygote, blastocyte, embryo, or fetus at that gestational increment. (D) Upon the submission of a request to the department of health by any person, hospital, physician, or medical facility for one copy of the materials published in accordance with division (C) of this section, the department shall make the requested copy of the materials available to the person, hospital, physician, or medical facility that requested the copy. (E) If a medical emergency or medical necessity compels the performance or inducement of an abortion, the physician who will perform or induce the abortion, prior to its performance or inducement if possible, shall inform the pregnant woman of the medical indications supporting the physician's judgment that an immediate abortion is necessary. Any physician who performs or induces an abortion without the prior satisfaction of the conditions specified in division (B) of this section because of a medical emergency or medical necessity shall enter the reasons for the conclusion that a medical emergency or medical necessity exists in the medical record of the pregnant woman. (F) If the conditions specified in division (B) of this section are satisfied, consent to an abortion shall be presumed to be valid and effective. (G) The performance or inducement of an abortion without the prior satisfaction of the conditions specified in division As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee (B) of this section does not constitute, and shall not be construed as constituting, a violation of division (A) of section 2919.12 of the Revised Code. The failure of a physician to satisfy the conditions of division (B) of this section prior to performing or inducing an abortion upon a pregnant woman may be the basis of both of the following: (1) A civil action for compensatory and exemplary damages as described in division (H) of this section; (2) Disciplinary action under section 4731.22 of the Revised Code. (H)(1) Subject to divisions (H)(2) and (3) of this section, any physician who performs or induces an abortion with actual knowledge that the conditions specified in division (B) of this section have not been satisfied or with a heedless indifference as to whether those conditions have been satisfied is liable in compensatory and exemplary damages in a civil action to any person, or the representative of the estate of any person, who sustains injury, death, or loss to person or property as a result of the failure to satisfy those conditions. In the civil action, the court additionally may enter any injunctive or other equitable relief that it considers appropriate. (2) The following shall be affirmative defenses in a civil action authorized by division (H)(1) of this section: (a) The physician performed or induced the abortion under the circumstances described in division (E) of this section. (b) The physician made a good faith effort to satisfy the conditions specified in division (B) of this section. (3) An employer or other principal is not liable in As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee damages in a civil action authorized by division (H)(1) of this section on the basis of the doctrine of respondeat superior unless either of the following applies: (a) The employer or other principal had actual knowledge or, by the exercise of reasonable diligence, should have known that an employee or agent performed or induced an abortion with actual knowledge that the conditions specified in division (B) of this section had not been satisfied or with a heedless indifference as to whether those conditions had been satisfied. (b) The employer or other principal negligently failed to secure the compliance of an employee or agent with division (B) of this section. (4) Notwithstanding division (E) of section 2919.12 of the Revised Code, the civil action authorized by division (H)(1) of this section shall be the exclusive civil remedy for persons, or the representatives of estates of persons, who allegedly sustain injury, death, or loss to person or property as a result of a failure to satisfy the conditions specified in division (B) of this section. (I) The department of job and family services shall prepare and conduct a public information program to inform women of all available governmental programs and agencies that provide services or assistance for family planning, prenatal care, child care, or alternatives to abortion. Sec. 3701.341. (A) The director of health, pursuant to Chapter 119. and consistent with section 2317.56 of the Revised Code, shall adopt rules relating to abortions and the following subjects: (1) Post-abortion procedures to protect the health of the As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee pregnant woman; (2) Pathological reports; (3) Humane disposition of the product of human conception; (4) Counseling. (B) The director of health shall implement the rules and shall apply to the court of common pleas for temporary or permanent injunctions restraining a violation or threatened violation of the rules. This action is an additional remedy not dependent on the adequacy of the remedy at law. Sec. 3701.3412. (A) As used in this section, "government attorney" means: (1) The attorney general; (2) The county prosecuting attorney with proper jurisdiction; (3) The city director of law, township director of law, or legal counsel for a village with proper jurisdiction. (B) T he director of health shall implement the rules adopted under section 3728.14 of the Revised Code. Either the director or government attorney m ay apply to the court of common pleas for temporary or permanent injunctions restraining a violation or threatened violation of the rules. This action is an additional remedy not dependent on the adequacy of the remedy at law. Sec. 3705.17. The body of a person whose death occurs in this state shall not be interred, deposited in a vault or tomb, cremated, or otherwise disposed of by a funeral director until a burial permit is issued by a local registrar or sub-registrar of As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee vital statistics. No such permit shall be issued by a local registrar or sub-registrar until a satisfactory death, fetal death, or provisional death certificate or a properly executed form created under division (C) of section 3728.14 of the Revised Code is filed with the local registrar or sub-registrar. When the medical certification as to the cause of death cannot be provided by the attending physician or coroner prior to burial, for sufficient cause, as determined by rule of the director of health, the funeral director may file a provisional death certificate with the local registrar or sub-registrar for the purpose of securing a burial or burial-transit permit. When the funeral director files a provisional death certificate to secure a burial or burial-transit permit, the funeral director shall file a satisfactory and complete death certificate within five days after the date of death. The director of health, by rule, may provide additional time for filing a satisfactory death certificate. A burial permit authorizing cremation shall not be issued upon the filing of a provisional certificate of death. When a funeral director or other person obtains a burial permit from a local registrar or sub-registrar, the registrar or sub-registrar shall charge a fee of three dollars for the issuance of the burial permit. Two dollars and fifty cents of each fee collected for a burial permit shall be paid into the state treasury to the credit of the division of real estate in the department of commerce to be used by the division in discharging its duties prescribed in Chapter 4767. of the Revised Code and the Ohio cemetery dispute resolution commission created by section 4767.05 of the Revised Code. A local registrar or sub-registrar shall transmit payments of that portion of the amount of each fee collected under this section As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee to the treasurer of state on a quarterly basis or more frequently, if possible. The director of health, by rule, shall provide for the issuance of a burial permit without the payment of the fee required by this section if the total cost of the burial will be paid by an agency or instrumentality of the United States, the state or a state agency, or a political subdivision of the state. The director of commerce may by rule adopted in accordance with Chapter 119. of the Revised Code reduce the total amount of the fee required by this section and that portion of the amount of the fee required to be paid to the credit of the division of real estate for the use of the division and the Ohio cemetery dispute resolution commission, if the director determines that the total amount of funds the fee is generating at the amount required by this section exceeds the amount of funds the division of real estate and the commission need to carry out their powers and duties prescribed in Chapter 4767. of the Revised Code. No person in charge of any premises in which interments or cremations are made shall inter or cremate or otherwise dispose of a body, unless it is accompanied by a burial permit. Each person in charge of a cemetery, crematory, or other place of disposal shall indorse upon a burial permit the date of interment, cremation, or other disposal and shall retain such permits for a period of at least five years. The person in charge shall keep an accurate record of all interments, cremations, or other disposal of dead bodies, made in the premises under the person's charge, stating the name of the deceased person, place of death, date of burial, cremation, or other disposal, and name and address of the funeral director. Such record shall at all times be open to public inspection. As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee Sec. 3728.01. As used in this chapter: (A) "Abortion facility" means any of the following in which abortions are induced or performed: (1) Ambulatory surgical facility as defined in section 3702.30 of the Revised Code; (2) Any other facility in which abortion is legally provided. (B) "Cremation" has the same meaning as in section 4717.01 of the Revised Code. (C) "Fetal death" has the same meaning as in section 3705.01 of the Revised Code. (D) "Fetal remains" means the entire fetus or any of its parts that are removed from the pregnant woman's uterus by an abortion, irrespective of the duration of the pregnancy. (E) "Interment" means the burial or entombment of fetal remains. Sec. 3728.02. An abortion facility shall d o either of the following with fetal remains it possesses: (A) Dispose or arrange for the disposal of fetal remains by interment, cremation, or humane individual incineration ; (B) If the disposition determination under division (A)(1) of section 3728.05 of the Revised Code indicates that the woman who had the abortion exercises the right under division (C) of section 3728.04 of the Revised Code, provide the fetal remains to the woman , for the woman to dispose of the fetal remains by interment, cremation, or humane individual incineration. Sec. 3728.03. T he humane individual incineration of fetal As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee remains shall be performed in a sterile incinerator. No other remains shall be simultaneously incinerated with other fetal remains belonging to another fetus. Fetal remains shall be incinerated separately from any other items or medical waste. Sec. 3728.04. A pregnant woman who has an abortion has the following rights regarding the fetal remains: (A) To determine whether final disposition shall be by interment, cremation, or humane individual incineration; (B) To have the abortion facility perform or arrange for the interment, cremation, or humane individual incineration; (C) To personally arrange for the interment, cremation, or humane incineration. Sec. 3728.05. (A)(1) I f a pregnant woman desires to exercise the rights under section 3728.04 of the Revised Code , she shall make the determination in writing using a form prescribed by the director of health under division (C) of section 3728.14 of the Revised Code. ( 2) If a pregnant woman does not desire to exercise the rights under section 3728.04 of the Revised Code, the abortion facility shall determine whether final disposition shall be by interment, cremation, or humane individual incineration. (B)(1) A pregnant woman who is under eighteen years of age, unmarried, and unemancipated shall obtain consent from one of the woman's parents, her guardian, or her custodian to the final disposition determination she makes in writing under division (A)(1) of this section. The consent shall be made in writing using a form prescribed by the director under division (B) of section 3728.14 of the Revised Code. As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee (2) The consent under division (B)(1) of this section is not required if an order authorizing consent for an abortion was issued under section 2151.85 of the Revised Code. Sec. 3728.06. An abortion facility may not release fetal remains, or arrange for the interment, cremation, or humane individual incineration of the remains until it obtains or makes a final disposition determination made under division (A)(1) or (2) of section 3728.05 of the Revised Code, and if applicable, the consent made under division (B)(1) of that section. Sec. 3728.09. An abortion facility shall pay the costs of the interment, cremation, or humane individual incineration of fetal remains, unless the final disposition determination indicates a method or process of interment, cremation, or incineration that i s not offered by the abortion facility. Any expenses for a method or process of interment, cremation, or humane individual incineration chosen by the pregnant woman that is not offered by the facility shall be paid by the pregnant woman. Sec. 3728.10. An abortion facility shall document in the pregnant woman's medical record the final disposition determination made under division (A) of section 3728.05 of the Revised Code, and if applicable, the consent made under division (B)(1) of that section . Sec. 3728.11. An abortion facility shall maintain evidentiary documentation demonstrating the date and method of the disposition of all fetal remains from the facility. Sec. 3728.12. An abortion facility shall have written policies and procedures regarding interment, cremation, or humane individual incineration of fetal remains from the As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee facility. Sec. 3728.13. An abortion facility in possession of fetal remains shall file the form described in division (C) of section 3728.14 of the Revised Code with the local registrar or sub- registrar of vital statistics for purposes of obtaining a burial permit under section 3705.17 of the Revised Code. Sec. 3728.14. N ot later than six months after the effective date of this section, the director of health, in accordance with Chapter 119. of the Revised Code, and consistent with section 2317.56 of the Revised Code, shall adopt rules necessary to carry out sections 3728.01 to 3728.13 of the Revised Code, including rules that prescribe the following: (A) The method in which pregnant women who seek abortions are informed of the following: (1) The right to determine final disposition of fetal remains under section 3 728.04 of the Revised Code; (2) The available options for disposition of fetal remains. (B) The consent form for purposes of division (B)(1) of section 3 728.05 of the Revised Code ; (C)(1) A detachable supplemental form to the form described in division (B)(4) of section 2317.56 of the Revised Code that meets the following requirements: (a) Indicates whether the pregnant woman has indicated a preference as to the method of disposal of the fetal remains and the preferred method selected; (b) Provides for the signature of the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion; As Reported by the House Health and Aging Committee (c) Provides for a medical identification number for the pregnant woman but does not provide for the pregnant woman's printed name or signature. (2) If a medical emergency or medical necessity prevents the pregnant woman from signing the detachable supplemental form, procedures to complete that form a reasonable time after the medical emergency or medical necessity has ended. Sec. 3728.18. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the provisions regarding fetal death certificates for the product of human conception of at least twenty weeks of gestation in section 3705.20 of the Revised Code. Sec. 3728.95. A pregnant woman who has an abortion, the fetal remains from which are not disposed of in compliance with this chapter, is not guilty of committing, attempting to commit, complicity in the commission of, or conspiracy in the commission of a violation of section 3728.99 of the Revised Code. Sec. 3728.99. (A) No person shall fail to comply with sections 3728.02, 3728.03, 3728.06, 3728. 10 , a nd 3728.1 1 of the Revised Code . (B) Whoever knowingly violates division (A) of this section is guilty of failure to dispose of fetal remains humanely, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Section 2. That existing sections 2317.56, 3701.341, and 3705.17 of the Revised Code are hereby repealed. Section 3. The prohibition under section 3728.99 of the Revised Code shall not apply to any failure to comply in violation of that section until rules are adopted under section 3728.14 of the Revised Code. TENNESSEE SB2568 010527 -1- HOUSE BILL 2577 By McCormick SENATE BILL 2568 By Norris AN ACT to amend Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 39, Chapter 15, Part 2 and Title 68, relative to the reporting and tracking of fetal remains. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF TENNESSEE: SECTION 1. Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 39-15-203, is amended by deleting the section and replacing it with the following language: (a) A physician performing an abortion shall keep a record of each operation and, in the case of a surgical abortion, the disposition of any fetal remains, and shall make a report to the commissioner of health with respect thereto at the time and in the form as the commissioner may reasonably prescribe. (b) (1) The physician shall note in the section regarding the disposition of fetal remains the method of disposition. (2) If the remains are transferred to a third party for disposition, the name and address of that third party, and the date of the transfer, shall be included on the report. (c) The method of disposition of fetal remains shall be in conformity with the rules of the board for licensing healthcare facilities. (d) Each record and report made pursuant to this section shall be confidential in nature and shall not be public record open for inspection. SECTION 2. Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 39-15-208(b), is amended by deleting the subsection and replacing it with the following language:SB2568 010527 -2- (b) No person, agency, corporation, partnership, or association shall offer money, or anything of value, for an aborted fetus or fetal remains; nor shall any person, agency, corporation, partnership, or association accept any money or anything of value for an aborted fetus or fetal remains, or accept any reimbursement of any costs associated with the preparation, preservation, transfer, shipping, or handling of an aborted fetus or fetal remains. SECTION 3. Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 68-3-103, is amended by adding the following language as a new, appropriately designated subdivision: ( ) Make and amend rules and regulations necessary for the tracking and disposition of fetal remains resulting from surgical abortions. SECTION 4. Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 68-3-505(a), is amended by deleting the subsection in its entirety and substituting instead the following language: (a) Each induced termination of pregnancy that occurs in this state shall be reported to the office of vital records within ten (10) days after the procedure by the person in charge of the institution in which the induced termination of pregnancy was performed. If the induced termination of pregnancy was performed outside an institution, the attending physician shall prepare and file the report. Each such report shall indicate whether the abortion involved a surgical procedure and, if so, which method was employed, and shall indicate which method authorized by the rules of the board for licensing healthcare facilities was employed to dispose of the fetal remains. If the remains were transferred to a third party for disposition, the report shall indicate the name and address of the third party and the date of the transfer. SECTION 5. Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 68-3-506, is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and substituting instead the following language: (a) Prior to final disposition of a dead fetus, regardless of the duration of pregnancy, the funeral director, the person in charge of the institution, or other person assuming responsibility for final disposition of the fetus, shall obtain from the mother- 3 - 010527 authorization for final disposition on a form prescribed and furnished, or approved by the state registrar. (b) Where the demise of the fetus is the result of a surgical abortion, a copy of the mother's authorization for disposition, specifying the means of the disposition, shall be appended to the informed consent signed by the mother prior to the procedure pursuant to § 39-15-202. (c) After final disposition, the authorization shall be retained for a period of three (3) years by the funeral director, the person in charge of the institution, or other person making the final disposition. SECTION 6. Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 68-11-210, is amended by adding the following language as subsection (b) and renumbering the existing subsections accordingly: (b) (1) (A) Each facility licensed pursuant to this title and performing more than fifty (50) surgical abortions in a year shall conduct a mandatory interim assessment of the facility's compliance with quality measures as specified by the board, in addition to regular inspections conducted pursuant to this section. (B) Such mandatory interim compliance assessment shall include contents prescribed by the board. (C) The facility shall develop a plan of correction with appropriate time for correction of any deficiency discovered in connection with an interim assessment and shall submit the plan of correction to the department.- 4 - 010527 (D) The department is authorized to accept the plan or timeline for correction or to request changes in the plan of correction or the timeline for compliance. (2) (A) Each facility licensed pursuant to this title and performing more than fifty (50) surgical abortions in a year shall report sentinel events. (B) The board shall provide interpretive guidelines to facilities regarding the meaning of sentinel event. (C) The department is authorized to require the facility to provide a plan of correction for preventing future occurrence of the reported sentinel event. (3) In addition to reporting sentinel events, each facility in which a surgical abortion is performed shall make and maintain a record of the disposition of fetal remains as required in § 68-3-505(a) and shall produce such records at the time of an inspection of the facility and upon request from the department. (4) Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this subsection (b) shall be grounds for discipline by the board pursuant to this chapter. SECTION 7. This act shall take effect up on becoming a law, the public welfare requiring it.TEXAS AN ACT relating to the disposition of fetal remains. BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS: SECTION 1.  Subchapter A, Chapter 241, Health and Safety Code, is amended by adding Section 241.010 to read as follows: Code, is amended by adding Section 241.010 to read as follows: Sec. 241.010.  DISPOSITION OF FETAL REMAINS. (a) A hospital shall release the remains of an unintended, intrauterine fetal death on the request of a parent of the unborn child, in a manner appropriate under law and the hospital's policy for disposition of a human body. (b)  Notwithstanding Subsection (a), if the remains of an unintended, intrauterine fetal death weigh less than 350 grams, a hospital shall release the remains on the request of a parent of the unborn child, in a manner that is appropriate under law and consistent with hospital policy. SECTION 2.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2015. President of the Senate Speaker of the House I certify that H.B. No. 635 was passed by the House on May 8, 2015, by the following vote:  Yeas 141, Nays 0, 1 present, not voting. Chief Clerk of the House I certify that H.B. No. 635 was passed by the Senate on May 23, 2015, by the following vote:  Yeas 31, Nays 0. Secretary of the Senate APPROVED:  _____________________ Date VIRGINIA 16103644D HOUSE BILL NO. 970 Offered January 13, 2016 Prefiled January 12, 2016 A BILL to amend and reenact §§32.1-127 and 32.1-291.16 of the Code of Virginia and to amend the Code of Virginia by adding in Article 6 of Chapter 29 of Title 54.1 a section numbered 54.1-2973.1, relating to disposition of fetal remains; penalty. ---------- Patron-- LaRock ---------- Committee Referral Pending ---------- Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia: 1. That §§32.1-127 and 32.1-291.16 of the Code of Virginia are amended and reenacted and that the Code of Virginia is amended by adding in Article 6 of Chapter 29 of Title 54.1 a section numbered 54.1-2973.1 as follows: §32.1-127. Regulations. A. The regulations promulgated by the Board to carry out the provisions of this article shall be in substantial conformity to the standards of health, hygiene, sanitation, construction and safety as established and recognized by medical and health care professionals and by specialists in matters of public health and safety, including health and safety standards established under provisions of Title XVIII and Title XIX of the Social Security Act, and to the provisions of Article 2 (§32.1-138 et seq.). B. Such regulations: 1. Shall include minimum standards for (i) the construction and maintenance of hospitals, nursing homes and certified nursing facilities to ensure the environmental protection and the life safety of its patients, employees, and the public; (ii) the operation, staffing and equipping of hospitals, nursing homes and certified nursing facilities; (iii) qualifications and training of staff of hospitals, nursing homes and certified nursing facilities, except those professionals licensed or certified by the Department of Health Professions; (iv) conditions under which a hospital or nursing home may provide medical and nursing services to patients in their places of residence; and (v) policies related to infection prevention, disaster preparedness, and facility security of hospitals, nursing homes, and certified nursing facilities. For purposes of this paragraph subdivision, facilities in which five or more first trimester abortions per month are performed shall be classified as a category of "hospital"; 2. Shall provide that at least one physician who is licensed to practice medicine in this Commonwealth shall be on call at all times, though not necessarily physically present on the premises, at each hospital which operates or holds itself out as operating an emergency service; 3. May classify hospitals and nursing homes by type of specialty or service and may provide for licensing hospitals and nursing homes by bed capacity and by type of specialty or service; 4. Shall also require that each hospital establish a protocol for organ donation, in compliance with federal law and the regulations of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), particularly 42 C.F.R. § 482.45. Each hospital shall have an agreement with an organ procurement organization designated in CMS regulations for routine contact, whereby the provider's designated organ procurement organization certified by CMS (i) is notified in a timely manner of all deaths or imminent deaths of patients in the hospital and (ii) is authorized to determine the suitability of the decedent or patient for organ donation and, in the absence of a similar arrangement with any eye bank or tissue bank in Virginia certified by the Eye Bank Association of America or the American Association of Tissue Banks, the suitability for tissue and eye donation. The hospital shall also have an agreement with at least one tissue bank and at least one eye bank to cooperate in the retrieval, processing, preservation, storage, and distribution of tissues and eyes to ensure that all usable tissues and eyes are obtained from potential donors and to avoid interference with organ procurement. The protocol shall ensure that the hospital collaborates with the designated organ procurement organization to inform the family of each potential donor of the option to donate organs, tissues, or eyes or to decline to donate. The individual making contact with the family shall have completed a course in the methodology for approaching potential donor families and requesting organ or tissue donation that (a) is offered or approved by the organ procurement organization and designed in conjunction with the tissue and eye bank community and (b) encourages discretion and sensitivity according to the specific circumstances, views, and beliefs of the relevant family. In addition, the hospital shall work cooperatively with the designated organ procurement organization in educating the staff responsible for contacting the organ procurement organization's personnel on donation issues, the proper review of death records to improve identification of potential donors, and the proper procedures for maintaining potential donors while necessary testing and placement of potential donated organs, tissues, and eyes takes place. This process shall be followed, without exception, unless the family of the relevant decedent or patient has expressed opposition to organ donation, the chief administrative officer of the hospital or his designee knows of such opposition, and no donor card or other relevant document, such as an advance directive, can be found; 5. Shall require that each hospital that provides obstetrical services establish a protocol for admission or transfer of any pregnant woman who presents herself while in labor; 6. Shall also require that each licensed hospital develop and implement a protocol requiring written discharge plans for identified, substance-abusing, postpartum women and their infants. The protocol shall require that the discharge plan be discussed with the patient and that appropriate referrals for the mother and the infant be made and documented. Appropriate referrals may include, but need not be limited to, treatment services, comprehensive early intervention services for infants and toddlers with disabilities and their families pursuant to Part H of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 20 U.S.C. §1471 et seq., and family-oriented prevention services. The discharge planning process shall involve, to the extent possible, the father of the infant and any members of the patient's extended family who may participate in the follow-up care for the mother and the infant. Immediately upon identification, pursuant to §54.1-2403.1, of any substance-abusing, postpartum woman, the hospital shall notify, subject to federal law restrictions, the community services board of the jurisdiction in which the woman resides to appoint a discharge plan manager. The community services board shall implement and manage the discharge plan; 7. Shall require that each nursing home and certified nursing facility fully disclose to the applicant for admission the home's or facility's admissions policies, including any preferences given; 8. Shall require that each licensed hospital establish a protocol relating to the rights and responsibilities of patients which shall include a process reasonably designed to inform patients of such rights and responsibilities. Such rights and responsibilities of patients, a copy of which shall be given to patients on admission, shall be consistent with applicable federal law and regulations of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; 9. Shall establish standards and maintain a process for designation of levels or categories of care in neonatal services according to an applicable national or state-developed evaluation system. Such standards may be differentiated for various levels or categories of care and may include, but need not be limited to, requirements for staffing credentials, staff/patient ratios, equipment, and medical protocols; 10. Shall require that each nursing home and certified nursing facility train all employees who are mandated to report adult abuse, neglect, or exploitation pursuant to §63.2-1606 on such reporting procedures and the consequences for failing to make a required report; 11. Shall permit hospital personnel, as designated in medical staff bylaws, rules and regulations, or hospital policies and procedures, to accept emergency telephone and other verbal orders for medication or treatment for hospital patients from physicians, and other persons lawfully authorized by state statute to give patient orders, subject to a requirement that such verbal order be signed, within a reasonable period of time not to exceed 72 hours as specified in the hospital's medical staff bylaws, rules and regulations or hospital policies and procedures, by the person giving the order, or, when such person is not available within the period of time specified, co-signed by another physician or other person authorized to give the order; 12. Shall require, unless the vaccination is medically contraindicated or the resident declines the offer of the vaccination, that each certified nursing facility and nursing home provide or arrange for the administration to its residents of (i) an annual vaccination against influenza and (ii) a pneumococcal vaccination, in accordance with the most recent recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 13. Shall require that each nursing home and certified nursing facility register with the Department of State Police to receive notice of the registration or reregistration of any sex offender within the same or a contiguous zip code area in which the home or facility is located, pursuant to §9.1-914; 14. Shall require that each nursing home and certified nursing facility ascertain, prior to admission, whether a potential patient is a registered sex offender, if the home or facility anticipates the potential patient will have a length of stay greater than three days or in fact stays longer than three days; 15. Shall require that each licensed hospital include in its visitation policy a provision allowing each adult patient to receive visits from any individual from whom the patient desires to receive visits, subject to other restrictions contained in the visitation policy including, but not limited to, those related to the patient's medical condition and the number of visitors permitted in the patient's room simultaneously; 16. Shall require that each nursing home and certified nursing facility shall, upon the request of the facility's family council, send notices and information about the family council mutually developed by the family council and the administration of the nursing home or certified nursing facility, and provided to the facility for such purpose, to the listed responsible party or a contact person of the resident's choice up to six times per year. Such notices may be included together with a monthly billing statement or other regular communication. Notices and information shall also be posted in a designated location within the nursing home or certified nursing facility; 17. Shall require that each nursing home and certified nursing facility maintain liability insurance coverage in a minimum amount of $1 million, and professional liability coverage in an amount at least equal to the recovery limit set forth in §8.01-581.15, to compensate patients or individuals for injuries and losses resulting from the negligent or criminal acts of the facility. Failure to maintain such minimum insurance shall result in revocation of the facility's license; and 18. Shall require each hospital that provides obstetrical services to establish policies to follow when a stillbirth, as defined in § 32.1-69.1, occurs that meet the guidelines pertaining to counseling patients and their families and other aspects of managing stillbirths as may be specified by the Board in its regulations; and 19. Shall require every hospital at which abortions are performed to dispose of fetal remains by burial or cremation. For purposes of this subdivision, facilities in which five or more first trimester abortions per month are performed shall be classified as a category of "hospital." C. Upon obtaining the appropriate license, if applicable, licensed hospitals, nursing homes, and certified nursing facilities may operate adult day care centers. D. All facilities licensed by the Board pursuant to this article which provide treatment or care for hemophiliacs and, in the course of such treatment, stock clotting factors, shall maintain records of all lot numbers or other unique identifiers for such clotting factors in order that, in the event the lot is found to be contaminated with an infectious agent, those hemophiliacs who have received units of this contaminated clotting factor may be apprised of this contamination. Facilities which have identified a lot which is known to be contaminated shall notify the recipient's attending physician and request that he notify the recipient of the contamination. If the physician is unavailable, the facility shall notify by mail, return receipt requested, each recipient who received treatment from a known contaminated lot at the individual's last known address. §32.1-291.16. Sale or purchase of parts prohibited; transfer of fetal remains prohibited; penalties. A. With the exception of hair, ova, blood, and other self-replicating body fluids, it shall be is unlawful for any person to sell, to offer to sell, to buy, to offer to buy, or to procure through purchase any natural body part for any reason, including, but not limited to, medical and scientific uses such as transplantation, implantation, infusion, or injection. Any person engaging in any of these prohibited activities shall be is guilty of a Class 4 felony. B. It is unlawful for any person to give, offer to give, or to accept the transfer of fetal remains for any reason, except that a person may give, offer to give, or accept the transfer of fetal remains for the purposes of conducting an investigation of a death pursuant to §32.1-283 or for disposition of such remains by burial or cremation. Any person engaging in any of these prohibited activities is guilty of a Class 4 felony. C. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the reimbursement of reasonable expenses associated with the removal, processing, preservation, quality control, storage, transportation, implantation, or disposal of a part. §54.1-2973.1. Disposition of fetal remains. A health care provider who provides abortion services to a woman shall dispose of fetal remains by burial or cremation. 2. That the provisions of this act may result in a net increase in periods of imprisonment or commitment. Pursuant to §30-19.1:4, the estimated amount of the necessary appropriation cannot be determined for periods of imprisonment in state adult correctional facilities; therefore, Chapter 665 of the Acts of Assembly of 2015 requires the Virginia Criminal Sentencing Commission to assign a minimum fiscal impact of $50,000. Pursuant to §30-19.1:4, the estimated amount of the necessary appropriation cannot be determined for periods of commitment to the custody of the Department of Juvenile Justice.